cardiac-2-subprojects.md, before:

[🏠 Go back to the home page](./README.md)

# Subprojects

The cardiac part of the Web Lab is handled by a number of subprojects.
While some of these modules depend on each other, they are written to be relatively independent and somewhat re-usable.

## Proposed workflow

- The Web Lab (specifically `weblab-fc`) will use `cellmlmanip` to load a model, manipulate it in ways specified by the protocol, and then pass it to `weblab_cg` to print Cython code. This code is then compiled by `weblab-fc`, and used to run an experiment.

- Chaste users will get some kind of Python script that replaces `PyCml`, and has a nice command-line interface that lets you load a CellML model (via `cellmlmanip`), and then export it to any number of formats. The export step consists of (1) any required code manipulations (e.g. calculating a Jacobian with `cellmlmanip`) and (2) printing code, which may either be quite vanilla C++, or something more advanced e.g. with lookup tables (implemented in `weblab-cg`).

## CellML annotation

Models will be stored in CellML (version 1.0/1.1, but 2.0 before too long), with RDF annotations.

A very short primer on CellML 1 is given [here](https://github.com/MichaelClerx/cellml-validation/tree/master/cellml_1_0), and more info + links to the specs and lots of tests can be found by browsing that repository.

Annotations are defined by the [`oxmeta` ontology](https://github.com/Chaste/Chaste/blob/release/python/pycml/oxford-metadata.ttl).

To annotate, variables in CellML 1 are assigned a `cmeta:id` attribute, with a model-wide unique name as its value.
This `cmeta:id` is then reference in RDF tags, which link it to an oxmeta identifier.
For example:

    <model xmlns:cmeta="http://www.cellml.org/metadata/1.0#" ...
    ...
    <component ...
      <variable name="time" public_interface="out" units="msc" cmeta:id="engine_time">
      ...
    </component>
    ...
    <rdf:RDF
            xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
            xmlns:bqbiol="http://biomodels.net/biology-qualifiers/"
            xmlns:oxmeta="https://chaste.comlab.ox.ac.uk/cellml/ns/oxford-metadata#"
            xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#">
        <rdf:Description rdf:about="#engine_time">
            <bqbiol:is rdf:resource="https://chaste.comlab.ox.ac.uk/cellml/ns/oxford-metadata#time"/>
        </rdf:Description>
    </rdf>
    </model>

One detail to notice in the above description, is that the variable has a public interface of `out`, and no private interface.
In other words, this component _defines_ the variable.
In the current set-up, only the `<variable>` tag in the defining component can be used to annotate.
(In CellML 2.0, this will no longer be possible, and we'll need a different strategy.)

## `cellmlmanip`

[Cellmlmanip](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/cellmlmanip) reads a CellML model, currently version 1.0/1.1, with plans for 2.0.
The CellML component structure is stripped, leaving a graph of [SymPy](https://www.sympy.org/en/docs.html) expressions, with units handled by [pint](https://pint.readthedocs.io).

The `manip` part of the name is mostly yet to come.
This will include:

- Adding or replacing parts of models
- Calculating derivatives (e.g. the Jacobian, or derivatives w.r.t. parameters)
- Unit conversion
- See e.g. https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/cellmlmanip/issues/21

Cellmlmanip can read and preserve oxmeta variable annotations.

## `weblab_cg`

[Weblab CG](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/weblab-cg) accepts a `cellmlmanip` model as input, and then spits out code in any number of formats.

It's probably a lot simpler than cellmlmanip, with fewer responsibilities.

At the moment we haven't decided exactly how to structure CG, but there are two obvious choices:

1. Write it as a fairly generic tool, but stick our own templates and tests in. This means all the CG code is in a single place, and that e.g. chaste developers can benefit from updates made by web lab developers. It's slightly messy.

2. Write it as a very generic tool, and create new projects *that use the CG infrastructure* to print code, with templates stored inside these new projects. If we go down this road CG becomes very small indeed and we might want to merge it with cellmlmanip.

## `weblab-fc`

[weblab-fc](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/weblab-fc) implements the functional curation (FC) language.
The new version will use `cellmlmanip` and `weblab_cg` to parse annotated CellML and create model files, writen in a Cython syntax.

Cython is a tool to interface with C/C++ code, in this case CVODE.
Unlike Python files, Cython-files need to be compiled, which happens partly static (for the CVODE wrappers) and partly on-the-fly, via distutils/setuptools (for the models).

### Some current implementation details

- Parses FC protocols (using fc's `CompactSyntaxParser` module)
- Checks model and protocol compatibility
- Manipulates the model, e.g. adding/removing variables or stimulus protocols
  - Again should transition from PyCml to cellmlmanip
- Generates model-specific Python code (extending the `fc` `AbstractModel` class) that can run simulations.
For more information, see [https://chaste.cs.ox.ac.uk/trac/wiki/FunctionalCuration/ProtocolSyntax].

## `PINTS`

Fitting will be handled using [PINTS](https://github.com/pints-team/pints).
Probably some part of FC will have to learn how to call PINTS.

Commit message:

Add note on unit conversion strategy

cardiac-2-subprojects.md, after:

[🏠 Go back to the home page](./README.md)

# Subprojects

The cardiac part of the Web Lab is handled by a number of subprojects.
While some of these modules depend on each other, they are written to be relatively independent and somewhat re-usable.

## Proposed workflow

- The Web Lab (specifically `weblab-fc`) will use `cellmlmanip` to load a model, manipulate it in ways specified by the protocol, and then pass it to `weblab_cg` to print Cython code. This code is then compiled by `weblab-fc`, and used to run an experiment.

- Chaste users will get some kind of Python script that replaces `PyCml`, and has a nice command-line interface that lets you load a CellML model (via `cellmlmanip`), and then export it to any number of formats. The export step consists of (1) any required code manipulations (e.g. calculating a Jacobian with `cellmlmanip`) and (2) printing code, which may either be quite vanilla C++, or something more advanced e.g. with lookup tables (implemented in `weblab-cg`).

## CellML annotation

Models will be stored in CellML (version 1.0/1.1, but 2.0 before too long), with RDF annotations.

A very short primer on CellML 1 is given [here](https://github.com/MichaelClerx/cellml-validation/tree/master/cellml_1_0), and more info + links to the specs and lots of tests can be found by browsing that repository.

Annotations are defined by the [`oxmeta` ontology](https://github.com/Chaste/Chaste/blob/release/python/pycml/oxford-metadata.ttl).

To annotate, variables in CellML 1 are assigned a `cmeta:id` attribute, with a model-wide unique name as its value.
This `cmeta:id` is then reference in RDF tags, which link it to an oxmeta identifier.
For example:

    <model xmlns:cmeta="http://www.cellml.org/metadata/1.0#" ...
    ...
    <component ...
      <variable name="time" public_interface="out" units="msc" cmeta:id="engine_time">
      ...
    </component>
    ...
    <rdf:RDF
            xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
            xmlns:bqbiol="http://biomodels.net/biology-qualifiers/"
            xmlns:oxmeta="https://chaste.comlab.ox.ac.uk/cellml/ns/oxford-metadata#"
            xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#">
        <rdf:Description rdf:about="#engine_time">
            <bqbiol:is rdf:resource="https://chaste.comlab.ox.ac.uk/cellml/ns/oxford-metadata#time"/>
        </rdf:Description>
    </rdf>
    </model>

One detail to notice in the above description, is that the variable has a public interface of `out`, and no private interface.
In other words, this component _defines_ the variable.
In the current set-up, only the `<variable>` tag in the defining component can be used to annotate.
(In CellML 2.0, this will no longer be possible, and we'll need a different strategy.)

## `cellmlmanip`

[Cellmlmanip](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/cellmlmanip) reads a CellML model, currently version 1.0/1.1, with plans for 2.0.
The CellML component structure is stripped, leaving a graph of [SymPy](https://www.sympy.org/en/docs.html) expressions, with units handled by [pint](https://pint.readthedocs.io).

The `manip` part of the name is mostly yet to come.
This will include:

- Adding or replacing parts of models
- Calculating derivatives (e.g. the Jacobian, or derivatives w.r.t. parameters)
- Unit conversion
- See e.g. https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/cellmlmanip/issues/21

Cellmlmanip can read and preserve oxmeta variable annotations.

### Unit conversion principles

(The text in this section is adapted from Jonathan's comments [here](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/cellmlmanip/issues/77))

- cellmlmanip should provide a general approach to adding conversions at model/world interfaces (whether the 'world' is Chaste or a WL protocol)
- It will do so by adding a new variable in the units desired by the world (if these are different from the model's units), transferring RDF annotations to the new variable (by just moving the cmeta:id in XML terms), and adding/changing equations as necessary so the new variable behaves appropriately.
- Inputs and outputs are with reference to the model. So an 'input' is when the world wants to change a model variable; 'output' is when the world wants to read a model variable.
- Only state variables, literal constants, or the free variable can be inputs.
- Any variable can be an output.


## `weblab_cg`

[Weblab CG](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/weblab-cg) accepts a `cellmlmanip` model as input, and then spits out code in any number of formats.

It's probably a lot simpler than cellmlmanip, with fewer responsibilities.

At the moment we haven't decided exactly how to structure CG, but there are two obvious choices:

1. Write it as a fairly generic tool, but stick our own templates and tests in. This means all the CG code is in a single place, and that e.g. chaste developers can benefit from updates made by web lab developers. It's slightly messy.

2. Write it as a very generic tool, and create new projects *that use the CG infrastructure* to print code, with templates stored inside these new projects. If we go down this road CG becomes very small indeed and we might want to merge it with cellmlmanip.

## `weblab-fc`

[weblab-fc](https://github.com/ModellingWebLab/weblab-fc) implements the functional curation (FC) language.
The new version will use `cellmlmanip` and `weblab_cg` to parse annotated CellML and create model files, writen in a Cython syntax.

Cython is a tool to interface with C/C++ code, in this case CVODE.
Unlike Python files, Cython-files need to be compiled, which happens partly static (for the CVODE wrappers) and partly on-the-fly, via distutils/setuptools (for the models).

### Some current implementation details

- Parses FC protocols (using fc's `CompactSyntaxParser` module)
- Checks model and protocol compatibility
- Manipulates the model, e.g. adding/removing variables or stimulus protocols
  - Again should transition from PyCml to cellmlmanip
- Generates model-specific Python code (extending the `fc` `AbstractModel` class) that can run simulations.
For more information, see [https://chaste.cs.ox.ac.uk/trac/wiki/FunctionalCuration/ProtocolSyntax].

## `PINTS`

Fitting will be handled using [PINTS](https://github.com/pints-team/pints).
Probably some part of FC will have to learn how to call PINTS.
